ELT and ML use case financial data (#2802)
astronomer/docs: learn/use-case-elt-ml-finance.md

If you want to use S3 as your object storage, you can change the `AWS_CONN_ID` in the `.env` file and provide your AWS credentials credentials. To use a different relational database, [add an Airflow connection](connections.md) to a [database supported by the Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/supported_databases.html) to your Airflow instance and set `DB_CONN_ID` in the DAG files to your connection ID.

## Run the project

To run the example project, first make sure Docker Desktop is running. Then, open your project directory and run:

```sh
astro dev start
```

This command builds your project and spins up 6 Docker containers on your machine to run it:

- The Airflow webserver, which runs the Airflow UI and can be accessed at `https://localhost:8080/`.
- The Airflow scheduler, which is responsible for monitoring and triggering tasks.
- The Airflow triggerer, which is an Airflow component used to run deferrable operators.
- The Airflow metadata database, which is a Postgres database that runs on port `5432`.
- A local [MinIO](https://min.io/) instance, which can be accessed at `https://localhost:9000/`.

> - A local [Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) instance, that runs on port `5433`.
> 
> ## Project contents

Author: ```suggestion
- A local [Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) instance, that runs on port `5433`.

To run the project, unpause all DAGs. The `in_finance_data` and `finance_elt` DAGs will start their first runs automatically. Note that the first two tasks of the `finance_elt` DAG are deferrable operators that wait for files to be created in the object storage, the operators are set to poke once per minute, you can change this behavior by setting their `poke_interval` to a different timespan.

## Project contents
```

---
title: "Run an integrated ELT and ML pipeline on Stripe data in Airflow"
description: "Use Airflow, the Astro Python SDK and Datasets in a data-driven way."
id: use-case-elt-ml-finance

> sidebar_label: "Combined ELT and ML pipeline"

Reviewer: Can we make the sidebar label more use-case driven? Something like "Financial data modeling" or whatever makes sense given the data?

Author: Yeah good call, how about `Financial ELT and ML pipeline` ?

---

> ELT/ETL and ML pipelines are two of the most common use cases for Airflow. This project shows how to use Airflow, the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md), and [Datasets](airflow-datasets.md) to build a data-driven pipeline that combines ETL and ML. For this example we'll be using mock financial data modelled after the [Stripe API](https://stripe.com/docs/api/charges). You can adjust the model class and hyperparameters to improve model fit. What R2 can you achieve?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ELT/ETL and ML orchestration are two of the most common use cases for Airflow. This project shows how to use Airflow, the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md), and [Airflow Datasets](airflow-datasets.md) to build a data-driven pipeline that combines ETL and ML. For this example, we use mock financial data modeled after the [Stripe API](https://stripe.com/docs/api/charges). You can adjust the model class and hyperparameters to improve model fit. What R2 can you achieve?
```

> ELT/ETL and ML pipelines are two of the most common use cases for Airflow. This project shows how to use Airflow, the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md), and [Datasets](airflow-datasets.md) to build a data-driven pipeline that combines ETL and ML. For this example we'll be using mock financial data modelled after the [Stripe API](https://stripe.com/docs/api/charges). You can adjust the model class and hyperparameters to improve model fit. What R2 can you achieve?

Reviewer: Can we add a little more upfront here about what the purpose of the model is? i.e. what are we predicting on and what would you do with the results. Even 1-2 sentences would probably be fine.

> ELT/ETL and ML orchestration are two of the most common use cases for Airflow. This project shows how to use Airflow, the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md), and [Airflow Datasets](airflow-datasets.md) to build a data-driven pipeline that combines ETL and ML. For this example, we use mock financial data modeled after the [Stripe API](https://stripe.com/docs/api/charges). Based on different customer satisfaction scores and product type we'll try to predict the total amount spent per customer, hoping to get some insight into which areas of customer satisfaction to focus on. You can adjust the model class and hyperparameters to improve model fit. What R2 can you achieve?

Author: Thank you for the context! Yeah, I was looking through the Stripe docs for an endpoint where the payload is easy to understand even for people not familiar with the Stripe API that is how I ended up at `charges`, but good to know for future examples. Next time I use their API I might poke you about the best endpoint to use 😄

## Run the project

To run the example project, first make sure Docker Desktop is running. Then, open your project directory and run:

```sh
astro dev start
```

This command builds your project and spins up 6 Docker containers on your machine to run it:

- The Airflow webserver, which runs the Airflow UI and can be accessed at `https://localhost:8080/`.
- The Airflow scheduler, which is responsible for monitoring and triggering tasks.
- The Airflow triggerer, which is an Airflow component used to run deferrable operators.
- The Airflow metadata database, which is a Postgres database that runs on port `5432`.
- A local [MinIO](https://min.io/) instance, which can be accessed at `https://localhost:9000/`.
- A local [Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) instance, that runs on port `5433`.

> To run the project, unpause all DAGs. The `in_finance_data` and `finance_elt` DAGs will start their first runs automatically. Note that the first two tasks of the `finance_elt` DAG are deferrable operators that wait for files to be created in the object storage, the operators are set to poke once per minute, you can change this behavior by setting their `poke_interval` to a different timespan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the project, unpause all DAGs. The `in_finance_data` and `finance_elt` DAGs will start their first runs automatically. Note that the first two tasks of the `finance_elt` DAG are deferrable operators that wait for files to be created in the object storage. The operators are set to poke once per minute, and you can change this behavior by setting their `poke_interval` to a different timespan.
```

## Project contents

### Data source

The Data in this example is generated using the [create_mock_data](https://github.com/astronomer/use_case_elt_ml_finance/blob/main/include/create_mock_data.py) script. The script will create CSV files in `include/mock_data` that contain data resembling the payload of the [Stripe API](https://stripe.com/docs/api/charges) charges endpoint and customer satisfaction scores. The data is generated to contain a linear relationship between two features and the target variable `amount_charged`.

### Project overview

> This project consists of three DAGs, one helper DAG to simulate an ingestion process and two pipeline DAG which have dependency relationships through [Airflow datasets](airflow-datasets.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project consists of three DAGs: one helper DAG to simulate an ingestion process, and two pipeline DAGs which have dependency relationships through [Airflow datasets](airflow-datasets.md).
```

![Datasets view of the use case project showing the DAG finance_elt DAG that produces to the dataset astro://postgres_default@?table=model_satisfaction which is consumed by the second DAG named finance_ml.](/img/examples/use-case-elt-ml-finance_datasets_view.png)

The [`in_finance_data`](https://github.com/astronomer/use_case_elt_ml_finance/blob/main/dags/in_finance_data.py) DAG is a helper that that runs the script to create mock data and the `finance-elt-ml-data` bucket in MinIO. After the creation of the assets, the data is loaded into the bucket using [dynamic task mapping](dynamic-tasks.md).

![Graph view of the in_finance_data DAG showing a task generating the mock data and another one creating the object storage bucket. Afterwards keyword arguments are generated by a task which are mapped over by a LocalFilesystemToS3Operator, the DAG run shown created 20 mapped task instances of the latter task.](/img/examples/use-case-elt-ml-finance_in_finance_data_dag_graph.png)

> The [`finance_elt`](https://github.com/astronomer/use_case_elt_ml_finance/blob/main/dags/finance_elt.py) waits for files to land in the object storage using the [deferrable operator](deferrable-operators.md) [S3KeySensorAsync](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/astronomer-providers/versions/latest/modules/S3KeySensorAsync). Once the files are available their contents are loaded to a Postgres database and transformed using operators from the [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`finance_elt`](https://github.com/astronomer/use_case_elt_ml_finance/blob/main/dags/finance_elt.py) DAG waits for files to land in the object storage using the [deferrable operator](deferrable-operators.md) [S3KeySensorAsync](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/astronomer-providers/versions/latest/modules/S3KeySensorAsync). Once the files are available, their contents are loaded to a Postgres database and transformed using operators from the [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html).
```

The [`finance_ml`](https://github.com/astronomer/use_case_elt_ml_finance/blob/main/dags/finance_ml.py) DAG engineers machine learning features based on the last table created by the `finance_elt` DAG and then trains several models to predict the `amount_charged` column based on these features. The last task plots model results. Both model training and result plotting are mapped dynamically over a list of model classes and hyperparameters.

![Graph view of the finance_ml DAG showing three sequential tasks, feature_eng, train_model_task and plot_model_results. The DAG run shown had 4 mapped task instances for model training and plotting each.](/img/examples/use-case-elt-ml-finance_finance_ml_dag_graph.png)

### Project code

> This use case shows many core Airflow features like [datasets](airflow-datasets.md), [dynamic task mapping](dynamic-tasks.md) and [deferrable operators](deferrable-operators.md). It also heavily uses the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md) an open-source package created by Astronomer to simplify DAG writing with Python functions for both ELT and ML use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This use case shows many core Airflow features like [datasets](airflow-datasets.md), [dynamic task mapping](dynamic-tasks.md) and [deferrable operators](deferrable-operators.md). It also heavily uses the [Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md), an open-source package created by Astronomer to simplify DAG writing with Python functions for both ELT and ML use cases.
```

> #### Ingestion DAG

Reviewer: Maybe put in parentheses the name of the DAG file here in the subtitle? Or include it in the first sentence, so it's clear which one it is.

> The ingestion DAG is a helper DAG to simulate data arriving in your object storage from other sources like for example manual uploads or via an [Kafka](airflow-kafka.md) S3 sink.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ingestion DAG is a helper DAG to simulate data arriving in your object storage from other sources (e.g. from  manual uploads or via an [Kafka](airflow-kafka.md) S3 sink).  
```

```python
@task
def get_kwargs():
    list_of_kwargs = []
    for filename in os.listdir("include/mock_data"):
        if "charge" in filename:
            kwarg_dict = {
                "filename": f"include/mock_data/{filename}",
                "dest_key": f"charge/{filename}",
            }
        elif "satisfaction" in filename:
            kwarg_dict = {
                "filename": f"include/mock_data/{filename}",
                "dest_key": f"satisfaction/{filename}",
            }
        else:
            print(
                f"Skipping {filename} because it's not a charge or satisfaction file."
            )
            continue
        list_of_kwargs.append(kwarg_dict)

    return list_of_kwargs

upload_kwargs = get_kwargs()
generate_mock_data_task() >> upload_kwargs

upload_mock_data = LocalFilesystemToS3Operator.partial(
    task_id="upload_mock_data",
    dest_bucket=DATA_BUCKET_NAME,
    aws_conn_id=AWS_CONN_ID,
    replace="True",
).expand_kwargs(upload_kwargs)
```

#### ELT DAG

> The ELT DAG is waiting for the file to be dropped in the object storage using the deferrable [S3KeySensorAsync](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/astronomer-providers/versions/latest/modules/S3KeySensorAsync) operator. [Deferrable operators](deferrable-operators.md) are operators that use the Triggerer component to release their worker slot while they are waiting for a condition in an external tool to be met. This allows you to utilize resources more efficiently and save costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ELT DAG waits for the file to be dropped in the object storage using the deferrable [S3KeySensorAsync](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/astronomer-providers/versions/latest/modules/S3KeySensorAsync) operator. [Deferrable operators](deferrable-operators.md) are operators that use the Triggerer component to release their worker slot while they are waiting for a condition in an external tool to be met. This allows you to utilize resources more efficiently and save costs.
```

> The two `wait_for_ingest_*` tasks are grouped in a [task group](task-groups.md), which allows for the passing of arguments like `aws_conn_id` at the group level and visually groups the tasks in the Airflow UI.

Reviewer 2: Major quirk of English and complex sentences like this - because we have an adverb in `visually groups` but not in `allows you to pass`, there's a weird implicit order that the two clauses go in.
```suggestion
The two `wait_for_ingest_*` tasks are grouped in a [task group](task-groups.md), which visually groups the tasks in the Airflow UI and allows you to pass arguments like `aws_conn_id` at the group level.
```

Author: Interesting, thank you! I had no idea, to me both versions sound normal, though your version sounds better somehow 😄

Additionally, a [cleanup](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/cleanup.html) task runs in parallel to remove the temporary tables after they are no longer needed.

#### ML DAG

Airflow [datasets](airflow-datasets.md) let you schedule DAGs based on when a specific file or database is updated in a separate DAG. In this example, the ML DAG is scheduled to run as soon as the `model_satisfaction` table is updated by the ELT DAG. Since the Astro Python SDK is used to update the `model_satisfaction` table, the dataset is automatically created and updated, without explicit `outlets` arguments. 

The `schedule` parameter of the ML DAG uses the same `Table` definition as a dataset.

```python
@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 9, 1),
    schedule=[Table(conn_id=DB_CONN_ID, name="model_satisfaction")],
    catchup=False,
)
```

The first task of the ML DAG takes care of feature engineering. By using the [@aql.dataframe](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) decorator the `model_satisfaction` table is ingested directly as a [pandas DataFrame](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html). 

> The `feature_eng` task creates a train test split, scales the numeric features and one-hot encodes the categorical feature `product_type` using functions from [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html). The resulting sets of features and targets are returned as a dictionary of pandas DataFrames.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `feature_eng` task creates a train test split, scales the numeric features, and one-hot encodes the categorical feature `product_type` using functions from [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html). The resulting sets of features and targets are returned as a dictionary of pandas DataFrames.
```

            "customer_satisfaction_product",
            "customer_satisfaction_service",
            "product_type",
        ]
    ]

    X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
        X, y, test_size=0.2, random_state=42
    )

    # ...

    scaler = StandardScaler()
    X_train[numeric_columns] = scaler.fit_transform(X_train[numeric_columns])
    X_test[numeric_columns] = scaler.transform(X_test[numeric_columns])

    onehot_encoder = OneHotEncoder(sparse=False, drop="first")
    onehot_encoder.fit(X_train[["product_type"]])

    product_type_train = onehot_encoder.transform(X_train[["product_type"]])
    product_type_test = onehot_encoder.transform(X_test[["product_type"]])

    # ...

    return {
        "X_train": X_train,
        "X_test": X_test,
        "y_train_df": y_train_df,
        "y_test_df": y_test_df,
    }

# ...

feature_eng_table = feature_eng(
    Table(
        conn_id=DB_CONN_ID,
        metadata=Metadata(schema=DB_SCHEMA),
        name="model_satisfaction",
    ),
)
```

This DAG includes two possible paths for model training, based on whether the Airflow instance runs on [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/). 

> Since Airflow DAGs are defined as Python code different task definitions for different environments can be achieved by a simple if/else statement. If the environment is `prod` the model training task is run using the [@task.kubernetes](kubepod-operator.md#use-the-taskkubernetes-decorator) decorator, which is the decorator version of the [KubernetesPodOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-cncf-kubernetes/versions/latest/modules/KubernetesPodOperator). This allows you to run your model training in a dedicated Kubernetes pod gaining full control over the environment and resources used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Airflow DAGs are defined as Python code, different task definitions for different environments can be achieved by a simple if/else statement. If the environment is `prod`, the model training task is run using the [@task.kubernetes](kubepod-operator.md#use-the-taskkubernetes-decorator) decorator, which is the decorator version of the [KubernetesPodOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-cncf-kubernetes/versions/latest/modules/KubernetesPodOperator). This allows you to run your model training in a dedicated Kubernetes pod gaining full control over the environment and resources used.
```

> Additionally, Astro customers can use the `queue` parameter to run this tasks using a dedicated [worker queue](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/configure-worker-queues) with more resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, Astro customers can use the `queue` parameter to run this task using a dedicated [worker queue](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/configure-worker-queues) with more resources.
```

> If the environment is `local` a regular `@task` decorator is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the environment is `local`, a regular `@task` decorator is used.
```

```python
if ENVIRONMENT == "prod":
    # get the current Kubernetes namespace Airflow is running in
    namespace = conf.get("kubernetes", "NAMESPACE")

    @task.kubernetes(

>         image="python",

Author: Putting a comment here to not forget to update, I am still trying to find a good image with sklearn in it 😅
